Okay, I know that you are working on the, just my engineer pointing out something.
Okay, Mad Max.
I know that you're working on something that has to do with sanctuary.
So tell us what sanctuary is and we can make a show out of what you say sanctuary is and
then we'll talk about what you're doing on it.
Lynn says that sanctuary, Lynn Abbey, one of my other offices, says that sanctuary is
a state of mind recognized by the American Psychiatric Association.
Sanctuary is a group effort.
Rob Aspen created a geography, a god list with the help of Andy Offit and the other original
contributors, a political situation and some base characters for this town.
And it's called, one would say, I guess it's the armpit of fantasy.
It's a black hole of Calcutta type town in which magic is operative and contract sorcery
is as common as wash water.
And then he farmed it out to a group of writers and initially everyone was supposed to just
write their story within the frame plot of the town and make reference to other people's
characters as walk-ons.
And that's what happened for the first couple of volumes.
But as we got to know each other, there became sort of a core group which decided where the
volume was going to go and where we were going to end up in that volume, what was going to
happen and bulletins would come out as to what was going on in the town at this particular
time.
And you would write your story and find somebody else to link your story up with.
I mean, I did a story once and then Andy picked up right where I left off and wrote
the rest of that section and somebody else came in before me so that we ended up writing
sort of collaborative novels and they are really fun.
They're to a large degree tongue-in-cheek and to some degree pretty serious.
The philosophy is a lot of fun with them and my character is very philosophical.
We take them from a group of historical periods which are allowable.
We were supposed to stick to Iron Age, you know, and no farther into ADs and 100s, but
someone came up with steel with the justification the Afghans had steel at 500 BC, so now we
have low-grade steel.
But it's not better than the good bronze.
And I did the weapons and sent around a lot of material and other people sent material
and other things and now we've invoked some more ancient guys.
And for me, for my part, it's sort of fractured history.
The Sacred Band in this book didn't get the Massacre by Alexander at New Chironia.
It exists.
It's alive and well in sanctuary.
Every time I come across a historical character or a group of characters, I've got a really
sad deal out of history.
I stick them into the sanctuary construct.
And the stories had done very well.
The sanctuary story of the Peace World group had its own panel at a World Fantasy Con and
then again at a World Con.
And it spun off a war game, a board game, red miniatures, what else do we get?
Paper dolls.
All sorts of good stuff.
So I spun off three novels from my characters that were in the story.
And I turned in the first one to Berkeley and I had no idea what was going to be out.
It's going to be out as a trade first.
But they're just wonderful to write.
They're so much fun.
The magic is just wonderful to do.
And I have all this ancient history background that I haven't been able to use in any of
my science fiction or science fantasy because it really pertains to Earth.
Little details and stuff that I've done up.
I'm very strong from about 2,500 BC to about 300 BC.
I have a lot of information.
I read a lot of dead languages.
So I started to do this group of three novels, which is going to take care of the war that
we started in the group thing, but couldn't handle in the group area because all the
group stories have to take place in the sanctuary in this town.
And the war is in the north.
So my characters and his friends go north and they deal with other parts of the continent
and what's going on there.
And there's the same kind of running conflict between science and magic.
But in this case, magic is the science.
And the magic of the science magic thing become the gods.
So we have the gods on one side and the magicians on the other side, logic on one side,
faith on the other side.
And my character is constantly regenerating himself, my lead character.
So he can't die, but he's just miserable.
He's so unhappy.
And I know who he's a real character from Earth history, but I'm not saying who until
the end of his book.
Those of you that are familiar with ancient history will know who he is from the quotes
and those who aren't.
Well, but I just love to do this.
They are so much fun.
They are like a paid vacation and they've had very good responses.
Everybody seems to like them.
I get a lot of letters about the characters.
It's a wooden sorcery.
The Homeric tradition is very dear to my heart.
I love it.
I don't think it needs any justification.
I think that those values ought to be brought to people's attention once again.
And Homer was writing fantasy for in his days, writing about something 800 years in his own
past when he was writing about the siege of Troy.
So I'm in good company to do them.
And they're the pure, the first pure fantasy that I've done.
So I'm having a ball with it.
It's really uplifting to do it.
Very free.
No terrible breaks to find out.
This is that because I already know pretty much the background that I'm going to use.
And they're just invigorating my side.
I just love it.
I've got a real simple yes or no question for you.
Why is fantasy getting so popular today?
We talked about the fact that not that many people really, when it comes down to it like hard science
and hard science fiction and all of a sudden fantasy is very popular more so than ever.
What's your idea on why it's popular?
Well, you'd be glad to hear that.
And from what I hear from the publishers it's turning around right now that there's more interest now in science fiction
or what is called science fiction.
I don't know if Star Trek 2 is technically science fiction, but things with the trappings of science fiction
because of ET and Star Trek and those various things.
So the editors and publishers now are looking for things that they can label science fiction.
But I think that happened partially from the influx of Lady Rears.
I don't know if you remember the real old days of science fiction,
but I remember when a science fiction meeting of a group at Boston called the International Interplanetary Exploration Society
with Isaac Asimov, Arthur Clark, Charles Clemens, one guy didn't know and me, I was 13.
So it was all pretty much boys night out.
And in the last few years women in fantasy, you know, the princess in the tower, all of that old stuff,
had a resurgence.
I don't know what people see in things like the Lepper books.
I don't remember the Donaldson things.
I truly do not understand why people like that sort of book. He's a very nice guy.
And Lord knows I have tried.
But the good and evil archetypal thing, I think it goes along with, you know, back to the earth and fundamentalism
and creationism and all of this kind of rejection of the modern world and back to a simpler age.
But I do also think that it's sort of over now in that sense.
And the kind of fantasy that we're writing is not that kind of high fantasy, which is pretty intense.
And I mean, this is mean and nasty and get down with lots of ancient weaponry and, you know,
the proper siege engine for the period and times, more like an ancient historical.
But I think they went over to fantasy from romance.
I mean, if you look at the definition of romance in a dictionary, you'll see that in general,
most dictionaries define it as a story that takes place in an exotic locale,
which indeed is what science fiction is, too.
But the romance element in fantasy is much greater.
And also it's simple. As far as writers producing it, it's a very simple form to produce badly.
So a lot of young writers try to start out there.
You get a lot of first novels in fantasy.
I mean, I've commented a couple of times on first novels that were fantasy novels,
because usually one applies a different standard to a first novel.
At least I'm willing to apply a different standard and will accept less from somebody's first novel
than I will put somebody later on.
And my standards for fantasy are lower.
I would like them to give me a good rise, take me in place, remove me from the scene,
and just not strain my credibility too very much.
And that's all I want from fantasy.
But I don't have time to read much of it anymore.
And I hear it's getting very, very bad.
But I hear this from other writers.
So I don't know. Writers are very jealous.
That's just probably a brilliant...
So maybe it's not getting as bad as I think it is,
but there certainly are an awful lot of books out there that say fantasy on them.
I can't argue with you about that.
It does take a certain amount more preparation to write science fiction.
One can write fantasy with just the amount of pristine mysticism one has picked up
by growing up in the Midwest or wherever one has grown up and gone to spending school.
We're a good fantasy, an ancient fantasy,
one that has some other cultural bias or a piece of science fiction,
takes a little more literacy.
And I just think it's an easy place for them to start.
Why the readers keep buying bad books.
And I said in an interview once that everybody that gets a bad book,
she sends it back to the publisher.
And I think if we all send all the bad books back,
you know, now I ask my money back, just send them back,
that there be less bad books, that they get tired of receiving them all
and then they would eventually get the message.
But that's about the only thing you can do.
You can refuse to buy a bad book or a book that doesn't meet your standards.
But if you buy it, you've done them a favor and you'll continue the problem.
I don't want literature to become like television.
I don't want it to keep thinking, you know, level by level,
so that they used to talk about, you know, you're writing for 12-year-old.
Now they're talking about you're writing for an 8-year-old.
When I start, they start telling me I have to write for a 6-year-old.
I haven't had a business.
I cannot write.
I write down.
I have to believe that the reader out there is right with me.
And I think fantasy writers, almost without exception, write down.
They write to a level, below the level that they're thinking on.
And I don't think that's healthy.
When we interviewed Pears Anthony, he said, I asked him a similar question,
he said that when he wants to write for fun,
what he really enjoys writing is science fiction.
But when he wants to make money, he writes fantasy.
And I guess that's the way it is now, that that's where the money is.
That, I don't know.
I got a lot more money for the carrying books, right?
When I had thought one could get for science fiction.
So, I mean, the books went to auction here, and then they went to auction in England,
and then I sold them in Germany, and I'm getting a portion.
Now, to have enough extra money to do that, it says something good as to what a publisher is willing to risk in science fiction.
And the books are running out.
So somebody's buying them.
I don't know what kind of money he's talking about, but I do know that he's been getting on the best dollar list with books that seem to be written exclusively
for an audience of fans, which I find very strange.
Nightmares and like that, those are his, right?
Right.
I don't read that anymore.
I used to read his things when he was doing wonderful stuff, way back.
I don't know if you read the one about the dinosaur or the, and the bird.
He had one of, out of a great bird.
Yeah, was that a horn?
A horn.
It was wonderful.
I wept.
I just loved it.
Um, any writer in any area has to fight losing their edge, letting creative pressure cause you to write something you don't want to write.
Because of the way I write, I can't, I don't have that problem.
That can't happen to me because I can't manufacture a story.
I get us either a story is there for me or it isn't.
I can't just sit down and say, okay, you know, I need to make some money.
If I'm going to write a story and it's going to be about this and that.
I have to get interested and then I go into an excessive state and the sanctuary things, even though there's fantasy, allowed me to do what I couldn't do otherwise.
If you think the market for science fiction is difficult, you should try the market for a serious historical.
Um, that is a very difficult market to write.
There hasn't been good money for books like that since the 50s and that's when all good ones were written like Margaret Yorsenor and those kinds of quality.
Historically, no one is doing it anymore.
It almost cannot be done.
Creation was just the exception to the rule of the glorified hour books.
I promised the sanctuary characters that they would just stay in these little tiny spaces.
I would get them their own deal.
So I did.
I got them a deal for three books and they're very happy and they're giving me good book back.
But I can't, I just couldn't, I wouldn't know where to start to create.
Um, that's why I don't write for magazines because they're looking for you to write in a particular slot and to create almost a little joke that short story for men.
I don't care for it.
I think if you write an honest book and you have something to say that the readership that I want will find it.
And that's all I'm asking because, you know, there's always a silhouette romance for somebody who can't read my stuff.
And I don't pretend to write for everybody.
And if I get a bestseller and we've got 120,000 out of Earthdreams, if we got 150, we might get the New York Times list.
But, um, the last volume of the Seaswell Things, which was called the Storm Season, was on the top 50 at Dalton's and Lawton's books nationwide when it came out.
And it's a phenomena.
It just happens.
I don't think you can sit down and plan to write a book that will be both a good book and a book that will be a bestseller.
I don't think you can make that many compromises.
And if a writer loses their edge for making money, right, things that they don't believe in, and writes books for the wrong reason, it's his trade-off.
In the end, you're not alive and your books are there.
And that's what's left.
And I tend to want to write for a building a corpus of words that I think has some value.
I mean, you're getting into people's heads with the hell of an opportunity to waste.
Somebody takes the time and the effort to sit down and read your book, not only go out and find it, but bring it home and turn off the TV and shut up the kids and, you know, let the guard out and read your book.
It's a tremendous, almost an honor.
I love it that people read your books, let you into their heads, become one with you for that amount of time.
And you ought to have something to offer, something to give them.
We do occasionally other things, other pseudonyms, political things, espionage, politics, stuff I know about intelligence gathering.
And in a book like that, one has to pay attention to formula.
You have to have a certain amount of action in a book.
But I also try to have, you know, a certain amount of action in my fiction because I think story.
You should never lose sight of the fact that there has to be story.
But to write just for money.
I've never tried to do it that way.
I write what I want to write and then I try to get money for it afterwards.
I wouldn't know where to start.
It's just, he's probably written many more books than I am.
And how, is he older?
I think he's about, I think he's pretty close to 50, yeah.
Yeah, I think at that point one's trying to cover one's best too.
And more power to him.
The more books that do well, the better off everybody is in this market.
Books of any sort.
It's just nice to know that people are reading.
But again, I haven't read those books.
I don't know whether they have good content or they don't have good content.
But I do say if somebody wants to write science fiction, they should be writing science fiction.
Because we don't have enough, and he's a good writer.
Or it was when I read him at the time of the war and things like that.
He was a good, strong writer.
And it's just a bad state of affairs that that is indeed still the case.
Okay, that's my list of questions.
Thanks very much.
It's been very enjoyable.
I enjoyed, I only interview people whom I enjoy reading their books.
And I don't interview anybody who I don't read and who I don't like their stuff.
So it's a pleasure to kind of get into your head too after you're being in my head for so long.
It's wonderful.
Great.
I agree, but I had a great time.
This was the most free that I've been able to be with somebody.
Well good.
Let me ask you if it would be any trouble if I could send my carrying books to you with postage and all that stuff.
And have you signed them?
Oh, certainly.
And if there's room, stick the Xerox, if that's convenient.
Absolutely.
Okay, I would appreciate that.
I'm a book collector, which is how I got into science fiction.
I think I'm a couple of years younger than you.
I was born in 1948.
Yeah, I'm 46.
So right in there, that's the plot.
Yeah, right.
So we kind of went through the same social time.
I used to live in New York for a while.
We lived in upstate New York and stayed down in the village for most of one summer.
And we had a really good time up there.
And I like that part of the country.
I only came back to Texas because of economic exigencies.
But it's kind of nice out here because we do have a radio show out here who would have thunked that.
I think it's good.
Well, I think you have to go to New York and then you have to leave New York.
Everybody should have the experience, but no one should be sentenced there for any long period of time.
I mean, I don't think I could be as creative there.
There's some noisy, mental noise and a lot of noise there.
Yeah, I can appreciate that.
Okay, I'll get you my books one of these days and I'll try to get them out pretty fast.
I do appreciate that.
I'll write the shows probably sometime in February and we'll voice them over and get you copies of them.
And I sure look forward to seeing what you put out.
I'll have to read the sanctuary stuff.
I have not read that because I did read Donaldson.
I do try to read some fantasy, but I just flat don't enjoy it as much.
Did you enjoy that, Donaldson?
No, I did not.
You're just reading.
I did it.
I read it.
In fact, just between me and you and the gatepost, I think the three of us are going to flip a coin and whoever loses gets to interview him.
Although he's a hell of a nice guy.
I mean, if he really is, but I just don't think I'm up to doing an interview on that stuff.
I wouldn't know what to ask.
I know.
That's the problem.
What can you say?
One of our guys is an English professor, Tolkien scholar and all that.
Maybe he could do it.
Yeah, that's what I'm hoping he loses.
But again, I really look forward to seeing what you put out in the future.
Listen, if you would return it within a year, I'll also send you the Cura Zini book.
Oh, sure.
Okay.
Yeah.
I've finished.
I've been through it and I've got a dog ear.
You'll have to deal with my dog ear.
Oh yeah, no problem whatsoever.
I appreciate that.
Yeah, okay.
I will send enough postage to cover that then and all that.
I don't want you to be out anything.
That's a very nice gesture.
Okay.
Janet, it's been really nice.
Thanks for conceding and we'll talk to you later, I'm sure.
I'll be enjoying it.
Bye bye now.
Bye bye.